# vanee-controller
raspberry pi relay controller for a vanee air exchanger

This is a simple project to keep an old unsupported vanee usable. The circuit board in it fried and no replacements parts are available, so I'm faking it with a raspberry pi. The house is wired with buttons that would trigger the air exchanger to run at high speed for a time. The blower motor has separate wires for low, medium, and high speed. I'll just use low and high, connected to a relay expansion board (RPi Relay Board: https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07CZL2SKN) on a raspberry pi 3. The common wire from the motor goes to the negative main, the positive main goes to the middle terminal on the relay, and the low and high motor wires go to the outside relay terminals. The relays are rated at 15A for 120V service I'm using, and the motor only draws a little over 1A on high. Fingers crossed that inrush current on startup isn't higher than 15A. Now that I think about it, the motor has a capacitor that should handle the inrush requirement, but do I need to control that myself... More research needed

The relay board by default (via jumper) uses BCM pin 25 / board pin 37 to control the first relay. So I use that as an output pin in the controller program to switch from low to high speed. 

I also want to watch for button presses to know when the fan should run at high speed for a time, so I use a GPIO pin (board pin 7) as an input with a pulldown resistor so default value is false. I hooked the 5V rail to the switch/button wire (with a 1k resistor in series, plus a .1uF ceramic capacitor from input to ground for transient voltage protection) and watch for the pin to go high. I experimented with a few different ways to debounce the button presses but I found that the simplest was the most effective: just sleep for 200ms whenever a press was detected. This seems to almost always be enough time for the single press to be released and have the value settle back to low/false. If we happen to double-count a press, NBD; it's just some extra time with the fan on high.

For each button press, 15 minutes of high-speed time is added, up to a maximum of 1 hour. When the timer is set, the relay switches to high speed. When the timer runs out or the program is terminated, the relay switches back to low speed.
